# TAG TDWG 2017 #

Text from slides.

## Agenda ##
* Review Charter
* Review work plan
* Agree milestones
* Open Issues
* Discussion

Notes: http://bit.ly/TDWG17-IG02

## TDWG TAG Mission ##

Mission

The Technical Architecture Group (TAG) will guide ongoing development of the TDWG technical architecture and advise the Executive and membership on matters relating to the principles, strategies and practice for maintaining the common technical framework essential to TDWG's mission to develop, adopt and promote standards and practice for the recording and exchange of biodiversity data.

## TAG Responsibilities ##

* TAG responsibilities will be limited to technical aspects of the TDWG architecture.
* On behalf of the executive, maintain oversight and report on:
** Issues of standards acceptance and compliance
** The status of existing standards - their completeness, interoperability and limits
** The technical evaluation of task group proposals and their reports
** Coordination of technical activities across Interest Groups
** Completeness of standards documentation and management
** Interaction with external standards activity
* Working with the membership to advance a common standards framework:
** Coordinate update and maintenance of the TDWG Technical "Road Map" and best practice documentation
** Maintain the TAG GitHub presence

## Work Plan ##

* Coordinate review of the GUID Applicability Statements
** Deprecate LSID recommendation (approved by Exec.)
** Review all guid-as recommendation
** Update/replace Statements for executive/membership review
** Reconvene Identifiers TG (approved by Exec.)
** Call for interest in membership of the Identifiers Task Group
* Initiate review of the existing TDWG meta-model documentation -> tdwg semantic model;
* Review the TDWG Technical "Road Map" and Best Practice documents

## Open Issues ##

Issue #9 Retire GUID standard
Issue #2 	Deprecate TDWG LSID recommendation 
Issue #7 	Revision of guid-as
Issue #8 	Deprecate lsid-as document
Issue #4 Draft TAG work plan
Issue #11 Remove privacy of this repository
Issue #5 Confirm membership
Issue #6 Establish repository

## Discussion ##

* Are we successful?
* Interoperability?
** Commitment/agreement to interoperability from IGs and membership?
* Roadmap: Identifiers, vocabulary, protocols?
** Beyond Vocabularies?
** A semantic model?
** ? Linked Data; ? Services
** Identifiers (HTTP URI)?
** Classes identified?
* Metadata profiles?
* What is needed for process: standards standards? TG leader docs?
